Looking at hash functions you can start to think about what actions they perform and how fast it can
be done.
When it comes to inserting something in our memory space Well it's going to be overdone.
We hash the key such as grapes through the hash function and places it automatically into the address
space that it comes up with.
Look up is the exact same we access the property that property is going to get hashed and direct us
exactly to the address to find the values.
What about deletes.
Same thing we simply use the key right away we know where to delete the item from and because it isn't
ordered.
We don't have to shift indexes like we did with arrays.
Everything is just nice and simple.
What about searching if we want to find something in our basket like apples.
Well that's easy too.
We simply use hash functions if we go to our playground in javascript I can create an object lets say
let the user and this user will have property of each 54.
Let's say that the name is going to be Kylie
magic.
Well let's say Kylie does of magic skills so whole set it to True and for fun let's say that the scream
is a function that will just console log a scream.
That was not the strongest of screams but I don't want to scare people around me when I run this.
I've created a user object and the age 54 named Kylie magic.
True scream and dysfunction are all going to get placed somewhere in memory different addresses.
But I can access this really really fast.
I can say user Daut age which is going to give me 54 at one time perhaps adding a new property.
I can just simply say user dot spell is going to equal Habra Berra.
And if I run this and let's just check out what the user object gives us we see that we now have the
spell Habra cadabra added.
This again is access of all one is 0 of one because we take it through the hash functions and the computer
decides where to put both spell and abracadabra in memory.
And a firearm user ADOT scream same thing but I cannot spell scream.
Same thing I get.
I get to access this function in memory really really fast at all of one how amazing is that.
And I know where you're thinking hash tables are amazing.
We should be using them all the time and you're right we should be using them in a lot of cases.
But as we know there's always pros and cons.
Now let me talk to you about one of the main problems with hash tables.
And I have a nice visual to demonstrate this for you.
I'll link to this and this video so you can play around with it later.
I have a little animation here where we have 12 memory spaces.
Remember our computer has limited space and when we create an object or a hash table the computer decides
how much space to allocate.
It's not going to allocate all the space to the hash table.
It's going to allocate a bit of it and I'll show you later on when we implement our own hash table.
How we can adjust the size but seeing that there is only 12 spaces you can imagine.
If I insert here let's say one see if I can make this bigger so you can see it.
There you go I'm going to answer let's say the number three gets inserted here let's do 55.
Insert it.
Oh what happened there.
Do you see the the hash function randomly assigned a space in memory and put it in three remember.
There's nothing telling the hash function to evenly distribute until everything is full.
Although hash functions are optimized to try to distribute this data all over.
It also matters what we put into it.
So when 55 gets hashed Well this hash function generates the address location of three to put in it.
And because we already have three there it does something funny here.
Let's keep adding here and see what happens.
I'll add two maybe add 12 and finally add 14 0.
It did the same thing again.
And what we just noticed here it's something called Collision
and a collision looks something like this.
We have the keys.
Let's say we're inserting the name and the phone number of a user and we initially place John Smith
this key gets hashed gets placed in the address space of 1:52 and gets stored.
Remember how he said it actually stores both keys and values it stores in something called bucket's
John Smith with the value that is his phone number right here.
And then we keep going with Lisa Smith then Sam doe than Sandra Oh no.
As soon as we house Sandra Dee it becomes the same address space as John Smith and we have a collision
and because of this collision we need a way to store both users somehow in this address space and something
funky is going on here with this little circle and then a point.
And Sandra Dee.
And just a hint here.
This is actually a new data structure that we're going to learn about called link lists coming up.
You see with hash tables we can't avoid these collisions with enough data with limited memory.
We're always going to have this collision.
So there is a possibility if we go back to our example and I refresh year to start from scratch that
we constantly just add despite our hash table that's really really fast.
Costly just keep adding to the same memory space.
Which slows down our ability to access or insert information because now if I want to check what's in
this address space I have to go one two three four five and so on and so forth.
Theoretically when you have a collision it slows down reading and writing with a hash table with 0 and
divided by k where k is the size of your hash table.
And remember because we remove constants and simplify things it becomes an all and operation.
Now coalition will likely happen in any hash table implementation.
And luckily for you you're never going to have to really implemented yourself and it's not a very common
interview question but you do want to know about it so you can talk about it.
There's two common ways to deal with these collisions.
I showed you one of them with something called link list which we'll talk about later on.
But if we go to the hash table Wikipedia page and look at collision resolution you can see that there's
a ton of different ways to solve collisions.
The way that I showed you is called Separate chaining but there's different methods like open addressing
and Robinhood hashing that you can read about if you're really interested in the topic.
The point I wanted to make is that there is a bit of a of a downside when we talk about fast lockups
and hash tables occasionally depending on the hash function.
It might take o of an.
All right let's keep going and expand our knowledge of hash tables and the next video.